---
layout: post
title: "The End of Jobs" and a Basic Income
comments: True
tags:
- Congress
- Welfare
- Jobs
- Social Policy
- Political History
- Nixon
- Carter
---

There is an article about the "end of jobs" in the most recent Atlantic Magazine. It is interesting and well researched. blah blah intro para

The base article, written by X, makes # points

* One point about something
* another point about something else.
* Culture
* Wanting a job
* Blah, refer to hand written notes

My take is based on commidification and the role of the worker in American life versus the basic income.

## Basic Income and the United States
### The Radical Roots of a Basic Income
One of the narratives concerning the EITC is that it is a relatively easy and pragmatic way for lawmakers to provide welfare. Even if the EITC is partially a story of pragmatic lawmaking, the program itself comes from the heart of the 1960s change oriented policy mood. The political and societal turmoil of the 1960s cannot be overstated, the decade where early ideas of what became the Earned Income Tax Credit were forged. It was a decade that opened with ‘grand expectations’ and ended with those expectations dashed (Patterson 1997, chs. 15, 18, 19, 21-23). Liberals spent the early and mid-parts of the decade advocating for expanded rights for the poor and ethnic minorities, arguing that the federal government should do far more to assist the disadvantaged (Patterson 1997, pgs. 638-642). The mass mobilization of liberals resulted in governments for the poor in Medicaid, increased assistance for the low income with the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964 and increased educational opportunities for the very young and poor with Head Start.

For many, the Great Society program reforms were not enough. These people were largely urban liberals who felt like programs like AFDC stripped the dignity out of those receiving them but did not provide much poverty alleviation in return. Piven and Cloward (1971) expressed this view famously in the early 1970s by pointing out that cash welfare programs like AFDC were largely used to pacify poor and desperate citizens. The ideas for their 1971 Regulating the Poor, however, stemmed from a 1960s grassroots campaign to reform welfare. In the mid-1960s, the influential Moynihan (1965) report was published, arguing that the increase in AFDC expenditures had been caused by a weak family unit among African Americans so they required more government assistance. Countering this point, Piven and Cloward argued that black families were no different than white families but instead the modernization of southern agriculture disproportionately hurt black families (Piven and Cloward 1971, ch. 6). As we will see, this increase of African Americans in poverty is a major part in early attempts at instituting a negative income tax of some sort.

At the same time, a large group of people organizing in Chicago were arguing that in order to truly enact change and help those they are intended to help, activists needed to act through existing political structure (Alinsky 1971). This was in stark contrast with groups like the Weather Underground who felt the best way to achieve radical change was through destroying the existing political order (Kirkpatrick 2009, Ch. 22). Piven and Cloward saw the increase in AFDC rolls as a structural problem that could be fixed through democratic change and wrote a 1966 article for The Nation magazine where they advocated a massive ”stressing” of the existing welfare system (Cloward and Piven 1966). What these activists suggested was that all eligible citizens should apply for any welfare program they can in order to force federal politicians to deal with the ‘problem’. The assumption, of course, is that there was no way the federal government would tolerate a massive increase in the welfare rolls so they would be motivated to act.

Piven and Cloward’s hope was that the existing system would be changed to more represent a negative income tax. At the time, the idea of a negative income tax was around twenty years old but in 1962 Milton Friedman advocated replacing the current welfare system with a negative income tax and a flat overall tax rate (Friedman 1962, ch 12). The way a negative income tax works is simple where a person would have an effective tax rate as a negative number, implying that the government pays the would be taxpayer. Although Piven and Cloward never expressly advocated this type of program in their Nation article, their “requirements” for a welfare system were widely understood to mean a negative income tax with progressivity. That is, the less income a citizen made in a given year, the larger their government payment would be and if the next year that citizen made more money than the amount received from the government would decline. This idea was attractive to Alinsky liberals because money would be given straight to the citizen. No one had to undergo a dehumanizing experience with some government agent and it would be more difficult to tie unattractive welfare restrictions to tax policy.

### President Nixon and the Family Assistance Plan
Piven and Cloward turned their activism into the National Welfare Rights Organization (NWRO) which hoped to implement their ‘stress the system’ strategy first tried to stop the Work Incentive Program (WIN) from being implemented (Bailis 1974). The Work Incentive Plan was one of the first attempts at trying welfare eligibility to willingness to seek work (Jansson 2005, pg. 254-255). While these regulations were eventually implemented, the idea of tying work to welfare had become rooted in a way that proved influential during future discussions on the negative income tax. The way Piven and Cloward envisioned the negative income tax was where all people – regardless of work status, gender, or race – were eligible for the program if they were poor enough. As we we will shortly see, the eventual implementation of the negative income tax was designed expressly for the “working” or “deserving” poor and was far narrower in scope than they had hoped. The Work Incentive Program was very influential in codifying that sort of mentality.

Following the implementation of WIN, NWRO sympathiser and architect of the Johnson’s War on Poverty Daniel Patrick Moniyhan was appointed special advisor to the President and in 1969, Richard Nixon proposed replacing AFDC with a guaranteed minimum income of up to $1,500 dollars in his Family Assistance Plan (FAP). The program would repeal Aid to Dependent Families (cash welfare) and replace it with a negative income tax. Nixon saw the increases in AFDC in a vein similar to Piven and Cloward except Nixon was less concerned about the effect poverty had on the poor and more concerned about the consequences of poverty (Patterson 2005, ch. 1). To Nixon, the urban riots of the late 1960s and the resulting unrest was something to be averted. Daniel Patrick Moniyhan attributes the entire plan to Nixon’s fear of urban violence:
>The events leading to and from the proposal of FAP have a conceptual unity that admits of separate treatment as a long range development in social policy. The proposal was made, however, as part of an over-riding short term strategy to bring down the level of internal violence. Moynihan (1973, pg. 116)

With the ‘short term’ fear of urban violence was enough to persuade the President to accept welfare reform and Moynihan advocating on behalf of the minimum income tax, it seemed like the bill had a strong coalition. Taken in conjunction with the fact that FAP also federalized many of the weak state level programs in the name of good government it seemed like Nixon would be able to persuade conservatives to accept his plan (Lampman 1969).

The House of Representatives quickly passed a relatively liberal version of Richard Nixon’s original plan, sending it to the Senate. During this time, observers thought that liberal Senators would be a stumbling block but instead, citing a more recent Milton Friedman editorial, conservatives argued that the negative income tax just increased welfare spending because it did not sufficiently make cuts to existing welfare programs – so it was not in line with his original proposal. Richard Nixon was facing opposition from his own party while NWRO and liberal northerners were advancing the cause. In order to win back conservatives, Richard Nixon conceded on deeper – as deep as 20% for some programs – cuts to existing welfare programs including and extending past AFDC. This proved to be the fatal downfall for the bill and the Senate never approved any version of a negative income tax as the bill died a death of a thousand cuts. Nixon did try proposing the law again in the subsequent Congress but that too failed after splintering the ideologically diverse supporting coalition and when Nixon saw the threat of urban violence had receded, so did his ambition to make sweeping welfare reform (Neuberg 2004).

The battle for the negative income tax had left the idea out of current political dialogue. What had happened? One lesson is that the strategy undertaken by Nixon and his ilk was expressly confrontational, albeit possibly not intentionally. As I mentioned earlier, the fight concerning FAP had widened the political fight to such a scale that the interests in the legislation became too diffuse and were left to the whims of potentially opposed veto players. Too many stake holders were involved in the process and large scale gridlock was invoked around the issue. Moreover, Nixon dictated a very ambitious plan which would literally overhaul over thirty years of federal welfare policy. He used up much of his political capital at the start of the legislative process without ever encouraging key veto players to contribute to the legislation.

Another important less obvious reason the Family Assistance Plan failed was because of the way Nixon and his allies framed the proposal. When introducing the legislation Nixon called it a “guaranteed income” which was associated strongly with communism (Cantril and Roll 1971). Moynihan (1973) strongly contends that had Nixon more strongly tied the Family Assistance Plan to the work requirements in WIN then the program would have experienced less grief. That is, FAP had very strong work requirements and Nixon chose not to emphasize them. A family could not become eligible for FAP without having their own income. The work requirements had been a key component of the conservative position on welfare since the 1930s. The choice of not emphasizing this aspect made the advancement of the legislation much costlier among certain legislators. One interesting component of the legislative fight for the Family Assistance Plan was the role that the National Welfare Rights Organization had in forcing an agenda. It is clear that the combination of social agitation and black violence frightened Nixon into proposing the FAP but what is less clear is how much of an influence the NWRO actually leveraged in the pre-legislative stage holding black violence constant. The fact Moynihan was a conflicted supporter of the NWRO – he supported the negative income tax but also work requirements – seems to suggest that he was able to leverage the urban violence into the plan he preferred. As such, we cannot understand the emergence of the FAP without realizing that urban violence and the NWRO played significant roles.

## President Carter and The Program for Better Jobs and Income

## Thoughts
